Update and refactor CoC policy and processes (#1135)
openjs-foundation/cross-project-council: conduct/COC_POLICY.md

This document defines the OpenJS Foundation's code of conduct policy.

If you want to report an incident, go to [code-of-conduct.openjsf.org][CoC].

***

# Code of Conduct Policy

> The OpenJS Foundation (OpenJSF) delegates to the Cross Project Council (CPC), via its [charter][], the responsibility of choosing, maintaining, and enforcing a Code of Conduct (CoC) for all of its projects, collab spaces, and for any related activities.

Author: I cleaned up the language here to clarify the scope of the escalation and appeal process. I think they strike a good balance and give the project a fair amount of autonomy provided they run a tight ship.

Let me know your thoughts about the updated language.

> The OpenJS Foundation (OpenJSF) delegates to the Cross Project Council (CPC), via its [charter][], the responsibility of choosing, maintaining, and enforcing a Code of Conduct (CoC) for all of its projects, collab spaces, and for any related activities.

Reviewer: It's still a good move that this info gets relayed to each project TSC. For example, how does the Node.js Moderation team feel regarding the fact that the OpenJS CoC team can override decisions made by the Node.js CoC (Moderation) team?

Imagine the situation where the Node.js moderators decide that said user is not violating the CoC, but then the OpenJS CoC team overrides said decision. Not sure I'd be happy with that.

I thought that OpenJS CoC would only be called-in if each project's CoC/Moderation teams are unable to reach consensus, no?

> The OpenJS Foundation (OpenJSF) delegates to the Cross Project Council (CPC), via its [charter][], the responsibility of choosing, maintaining, and enforcing a Code of Conduct (CoC) for all of its projects, collab spaces, and for any related activities.

Reviewer: Right, would love to chatter about that on our next meeting.

> The OpenJS Foundation (OpenJSF) delegates to the Cross Project Council (CPC), via its [charter][], the responsibility of choosing, maintaining, and enforcing a Code of Conduct (CoC) for all of its projects, collab spaces, and for any related activities.

Author: Sounds good. Let's keep this labeled as unresolved until then.

> The OpenJS Foundation (OpenJSF) delegates to the Cross Project Council (CPC), via its [charter][], the responsibility of choosing, maintaining, and enforcing a Code of Conduct (CoC) for all of its projects, collab spaces, and for any related activities.

Reviewer: As we discussed on last meeting, individual CPC representatives should already have done the relaying of information at this point in time.

+ For what it's laid here, the CPC CoC can only override decisions when there's a conflict of interest of emergencies as outlined in this PR.

Resolving this thread, but feel free to reopen if questions remain.

6. Document the foundation's escalation and appeal process alongside the code of conduct.
7. Participate in good faith in the escalation and appeal processes.

Reporters, victims, and offenders may [escalate](#escalation) an issue to the CoC Team at any point in the process in case of a conflict of interest. They may [appeal](#appeals) the decision to the CoC Team up to thirty (30) days after a response was provided if they believe that the process was not followed properly.

## Moderation

Each project is free to implement moderation processes appropriate for the size and scope of the project provided these processes abide by the code of conduct and by this policy.

## Escalation

The CoC Team is empowered to manage escalation requests of incident reports managed by projects that have opted-in to enforce the code of conduct themselves.

Projects are expected to participate in good faith in the escalation process. 

## Appeals

Victim(s) and offender(s) of an incident have thirty (30) days to appeal to the CoC Team the decision made in response to an incident report if they believe the process was not properly followed.

> If the initial report was already managed by the CoC Team, a different set of CoC Team members should be chosen to manage the appeal process. The Coc Team may choose to involve external people if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the initial report was already managed by the CoC Team, a different set of CoC Team members should be chosen to manage the appeal process. The CoC Team may choose to involve external people if needed.
```

If the appeal follows an incident report managed by a project, the project is expected to participate in the appeal process in good faith. 

Appeals are not suspensive.

[CoC]: https://code-of-conduct.openjsf.org/
[Charter]: https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/CPC-CHARTER.md

> [CoC Team Charter]: https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/conduct/COC_TEAM_CHARTER.md

Reviewer 3: This file does not exist

Author: 🤦 Thanks for catching this.

Your broader point that this file needs to actually contain content to merge the PR is well taken and I agree.

Author: Resolving this as I've added a task to complete the CoC Team charter before merging this PR.

This document defines the OpenJS Foundation's code of conduct policy.

If you want to report an incident, go to [code-of-conduct.openjsf.org][CoC].

***

# Code of Conduct Policy

The OpenJS Foundation (OpenJSF) delegates to the Cross Project Council (CPC), via its [charter][], the responsibility of choosing, maintaining, and enforcing a Code of Conduct (CoC) for all of its projects, collab spaces, and for any related activities.

## Code of Conduct

The OpenJSF's code of conduct is located at [code-of-conduct.openjsf.org][CoC]. It is based on the [Contributor Covenant](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/).

A common code of conduct allows a common escalation and appeal process and allows better support of projects in their efforts to apply the code of conduct.

> All OpenJSF projects, collab spaces, and any activities related to the OpenJSF are operating under this code of conduct unless otherwise stated. (For example, events organized in partnership with other organizations might be operating under a different code of conduct.)

Reviewer: How do we dispatch updates of our CoC to project's CoC's? For example, should Node.js's CoC simply redirect to OpenJS's CoC? (https://github.com/nodejs/admin/blob/HEAD/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)

Author: That's a great point. It seems related to https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/pull/889. Can we address it there, separately from this PR?

Author: We already changed the CoC on a number of occasions without a dedicated process, so I don't think we should block on this. Let's not forget that the CPC is composed of representatives of projects precisely so that decisions taken here reflect project needs and don't take anyone by surprise.

Reviewer: I have mixed feelings here as for merging this halfway... with open requirements. But not strong enough to oppose to this approach.

My take is that knowing how slow certain pieces of our collaboration process are... We might at some point have an incomplete CoC process/charter for a while until all pieces get finally merged together.

Shouldn't we then merge this to a "feature-branch" and have it all merged to "main" after done?

Author: A dedicated process for changing the CoC is not a missing piece, it's an additional feature. The CoC is under the CPC's purview and thus, without any dedicated process for changing the CoC, regular CPC process applies.

Reviewer: I see, that's fair and I was under the impression we were changing that. Thx for clarifying!

Sometimes large PR diffs make it confusing to know what's really going on.

> Projects joining the foundation that already have a code of conduct will need to adopt the OpenJSF's CoC within three (3) months. Projects that don't already have a code of conduct operate under the OpenJSF's CoC as soon as they enter incubation.

Reviewer: Should this be mentioned here? This should be said on this document (https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/PROJECT_PROGRESSION.md) instead of here. This sort of information feels only relevant for projects joining the Foundation.

Author: I understand that perspective and agree that this information needs to be repeated in the onboarding-related doc, but the decision to give some leniency to projects joining the foundation is a policy decision and belongs here, imho.

Author: Yes! Would you want to take a stab at it?

Reviewer: wdym? do you want me to make the proposed changes? 👀

Author: Yeah, I was thinking mainly about updating the issue template [here](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/project-status/blob/main/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/project-onboarding-checklist-template.md) alongside updating `PROJECT_PROGRESSION.md`.

Reviewer: I can work on that, can we add a separate "tasklist" for this on the main CoC refactor issue? (If you don't mind doing that, I can then start working on a PR)

Reviewer: _also feel free to resolve this specific thread once you've added the task on the issue and assigned it to me 🙇_

Author: See https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/issues/1255.

## Reporting incidents

Reporting incidents should be as simple and flexible as possible.

All information necessary to report an incident must be publicly documented directly alongside the code of conduct itself. This information must contain at least the following:

1. A general email address at which incidents can be reported.
2. The name and email address of each recipient of the general email address.

Reporters may choose to report an incident by using the general email address provided or by contacting any of its recipients individually, either by using their provided email, reaching out in person, or by any other reasonable means.

An acknowledgment of receipt should be promptly issued to incident reporters.

The name and contact details of the people responsible for managing the incident report should be provided to reporters as soon as possible (to uncover conflicts of interest upfront and allow for escalation).

> ## Incident Response

Reviewer: Node.js over the years developed quite a good handbook for handling Moderation incidents (Moderation Policy): https://github.com/nodejs/admin/blob/main/Moderation-Policy.md

What about adopting it? It feels quite complete and very well written...

Author: @ovflowd: Could you please file a separate issue for your suggestion to adopt a uniform moderation approach across the foundation? This seems like a well-scoped and distinct enough issue that we can keep separated.

Author: @PaulaPaul: wrt to getting inspiration from the CNCF, my belief was that this was more about the CoC Team structure and its processes than about moderation. Looking forward to chat about it tomorrow, though.

Reviewer: > Social media or other online behavior targeted at contributors in the context of their contributions to the Foundation?

As much as I'd love that, I wonder how we'd enforce CoC on platforms not governed by us?

Reviewer: > @ovflowd: Could you please file a separate issue for your suggestion to adopt a uniform moderation approach across the foundation? This seems like a well-scoped and distinct enough issue that we can keep separated.

I may, but I don't think we can merge this PR as it is without actually providing these processes here; Since this PR effectively changes the moderation processes, and in a technical standpoint, it doesn't make sense to merge "tech debt"; I wouldn't merge this PR changes to moderation processes if we already have plans to update them in an uniform way. Wdyt?

Author: @PaulaPaul wrote:
> My thoughts there were not about enforcement but for the scope of the CoC. For example, if I am harassed online because of work I contributed to the foundation, that violation of the CoC would be in social media, not in a comment on a repo or in Slack. If that ever happened to me I would like to know if I could raise it as a violation of the CoC (one way or another). It's not realistic to think the CPC could police social media but could act as a place to report CoC violations of any kind specifically related to foundation contributions. Does that make sense?

This is mostly covered in the [scope section of the CoC](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md#scope):

> _This Code of Conduct applies within all community spaces, and also applies when an individual is officially representing the community in public spaces. Examples of representing our community include using an official e-mail address, posting via an official social media account, or acting as an appointed representative at an online or offline event._

Reviewer: > Are we talking about incident report management here, or about moderation? Moderation (i.e. pro-actively managing comments, etc., before incidents happen and are reported) is managed by the projects themselves. My understanding is that the policy you linked is a moderation policy, not a process to manage incident reports. 

Yes and No. The Moderation process/policy of Node.js describes an overall guidelines how Moderators should handle incidents (either proactively or through reports);

And I believe moderation in-repository is fundamental here, too; We do, after all (CPC and the Foundation) live within our Slack and this GitHub organization.

Reviewer: I've created an Issue: https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/issues/1215

Author: Can we mark this as resolved? @PaulaPaul if you believe the scope of the CoC should be changed, can you file a separate issue for that please?

This document defines the OpenJS Foundation's code of conduct policy.

If you want to report an incident, go to [code-of-conduct.openjsf.org][CoC].

***

# Code of Conduct Policy

The OpenJS Foundation (OpenJSF) delegates to the Cross Project Council (CPC), via its [charter][], the responsibility of choosing, maintaining, and enforcing a Code of Conduct (CoC) for all of its projects, collab spaces, and for any related activities.

## Code of Conduct

The OpenJSF's code of conduct is located at [code-of-conduct.openjsf.org][CoC]. It is based on the [Contributor Covenant](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/).

A common code of conduct allows a common escalation and appeal process and allows better support of projects in their efforts to apply the code of conduct.

All OpenJSF projects, collab spaces, and any activities related to the OpenJSF are operating under this code of conduct unless otherwise stated. (For example, events organized in partnership with other organizations might be operating under a different code of conduct.)

> Projects joining the foundation that already have a code of conduct will need to adopt the OpenJSF's CoC within three (3) months. Projects that don't already have a code of conduct operate under the OpenJSF's CoC as soon as they enter incubation.

Author: I see how they make the whole thing look overly formal. However, I find they make the content more accessible (e.g. I find them helpful). Fine either way, though.

These actions must be documented at the earliest convenient occasion for review by the Code of Conduct Team or the other people responsible for managing incident reports for the related project.

## Incident Response

All incident reports will be reviewed and investigated and will result in a response that is deemed necessary and appropriate to the circumstances.

## Responsiveness

Every incident report, escalation request, or appeal will be promptly acknowledged upon receipt and a response provided in a timely manner. All parties involved should be kept informed and updated in a timely and efficient manner.

## Transparency

The number and relevant details of the reported incidents, escalation requests, and appeals, along with the responses made and actions taken should be made available, at least on a yearly basis, in a redacted form, to the Cross Project Council for further dissemination.

## Record keeping

A record of all communications related to an incident report, escalation request, or appeal must be kept.

## Confidentiality

The identity of the harmed individual(s) and the and reporter(s) of an incident report must be kept confidential.

## Conflict of Interest

> Any person involved with the management of an incident report must immediately notify the CoC Team in writing and recuse themselves from the process if they have been involved in the incident itself or have any other conflict of interest with any of the involved parties (e.g. same employer).

Author: Agree we should have a separate conflict of interest policy. Don't think we should block on this, though, as it's not like we had one before.

> Any person involved with the management of an incident report must immediately notify the CoC Team in writing and recuse themselves from the process if they have been involved in the incident itself or have any other conflict of interest with any of the involved parties (e.g. same employer).

Reviewer 3: > Don't think we should block on this, though, as it's not like we had one before.

Eh, at this point I'm worried about this _never_ getting done if we don't do it now. Knowing how we work, I'd prefer if we solved it now before merging.

> Any person involved with the management of an incident report must immediately notify the CoC Team in writing and recuse themselves from the process if they have been involved in the incident itself or have any other conflict of interest with any of the involved parties (e.g. same employer).

Author: Agreed to carve out clearer definition of conflict of interest in followup PR. Tracking in #1238.

> Any person involved with the management of an incident report must immediately notify the CoC Team in writing and recuse themselves from the process if they have been involved in the incident itself or have any other conflict of interest with any of the involved parties (e.g. same employer).

Author: @bnb can you please confirm you're OK with deferring this by resolving this conversation? Thanks!

5. List the people responsible for managing incident reports alongside the code of conduct as outlined in the [Reporting incidents section](#reporting-incidents).
6. Publicly document their decision-making process for responding to incident reports.
7. Document the foundation's escalation and appeal process alongside the code of conduct.
8. Participate in good faith in the [escalation](#escalation) and [appeal](#appeals) processes.

## Moderation

Each project is free to implement moderation processes appropriate for the size and scope of the project provided these processes abide by the code of conduct and by this policy.

## Escalation

Reporters, harmed individuals, and accused individuals may [escalate](#escalation) an issue to the CoC Team at any point in the process in case of a conflict of interest, if the report is not being handled appropriately, or in case of an emergency.

The CoC Team is empowered to manage escalation requests of incident reports managed by projects that have opted-in to enforce the code of conduct themselves.

> If the CoC Team finds that the escalation request has merit, the CoC Team may decide to takeover the management of the incident report or request changes to the existing management process. 

Author: I think it's important for projects to be accountable to properly implementing the policies agreed to by project representatives in the CPC.

> If the CoC Team finds that the escalation request has merit, the CoC Team may decide to takeover the management of the incident report or request changes to the existing management process. 

Reviewer 3: I think that is orthogonal to my point, and is an extremely blunt way to manage this situation that removes nuance that will _always_ exist when something like this comes up. If this ever happens, that as the answer will not suffice.

> If the CoC Team finds that the escalation request has merit, the CoC Team may decide to takeover the management of the incident report or request changes to the existing management process. 

Reviewer 4: Copying this comment here (breaking out individual comments as requested by @tobie)

Since there isn't consensus on the item above (or, how to reach consensus) is it possible to leave this as is, but then make this a specific part of the follow up activity needed to review CoC updates with each individual project (allowing us to land the PR but expecting we will need to open additional issues specific to the escalation and appeal policy?)

An option here is to open an issue with each project to specifically and openly request approval and also openly document which projects opt-in to managing their own CoC reporting.

> If the CoC Team finds that the escalation request has merit, the CoC Team may decide to takeover the management of the incident report or request changes to the existing management process. 

Author: > An option here is to open an issue with each project to specifically and openly request approval

The CPC _is_ the forum for working this approval out.

> and also openly document which projects opt-in to managing their own CoC reporting.

That's already covered and not subject to disagreement.

> If the CoC Team finds that the escalation request has merit, the CoC Team may decide to takeover the management of the incident report or request changes to the existing management process. 

Author: Fixed in 08811e8. @bnb mind looking at the language and seeing what you think of it? Thanks.

Projects are expected to participate in good faith in the escalation process and to share all the information related to the incident report with the CoC Team.

## Appeals

Harmed individuals and accused individuals have thirty (30) days to appeal to the CoC Team a decision made in response to an incident report. Decisions may only be appealled on the grounds that the documented process was not properly followed or that it did not meet the requirements of this policy. If the CoC Team finds that the appeal has merit, it may decide to override the decision that was previously made.

If the initial report was already managed by the CoC Team, a different set of CoC Team members should be chosen to manage the appeal process. The CoC Team may choose to involve external people if needed.

If the appeal follows an incident report managed by a project, the project is expected to participate in good faith in the appeal process and to share all the information related to the incident report with the CoC Team.

> Appeals are not suspensive.

Author: ```suggestion
Appeals do not delay or block the execution of decisions communicated in the response.
```

7. Document the foundation's escalation and appeal process alongside the code of conduct.
8. Participate in good faith in the [escalation](#escalation) and [appeal](#appeals) processes.

## Moderation

Each project is free to implement moderation processes appropriate for the size and scope of the project provided these processes abide by the code of conduct and by this policy.

## Escalation

Reporters, harmed individuals, and accused individuals may [escalate](#escalation) an issue to the CoC Team at any point in the process in case of a conflict of interest, if the report is not being handled appropriately (for example, if there are unacceptable delays, a lack of communication, confidentiality isn't respected, etc.), or in case of an emergency.

The CoC Team is empowered to manage escalation requests of incident reports managed by projects that have opted-in to enforce the code of conduct themselves.

If the CoC Team finds that the escalation request has merit, the CoC Team may decide to takeover the management of the incident report or refer the issue to the Cross Project Council which may request changes to the existing management process. 

> Projects are expected to participate in good faith in the escalation process and to share all the information related to the incident report with the CoC Team. The CoC Team is expected to consider project and community needs during the escalation process and may involve the Cross Project Council if necessary and project leadership if appropriate.

Author: This is specific to appeals and escalation.

These actions must be documented at the earliest convenient occasion for review by the Code of Conduct Team or the other people responsible for managing incident reports for the related project.

## Incident Response

All incident reports will be reviewed and investigated and will result in a response that is deemed necessary and appropriate to the circumstances.

## Responsiveness

Every incident report, escalation request, or appeal will be promptly acknowledged upon receipt and a response provided in a timely manner. All parties involved should be kept informed and updated in a timely and efficient manner.

## Transparency

The number and relevant details of the reported incidents, escalation requests, and appeals, along with the responses made and actions taken should be made available, at least on a yearly basis, in a redacted form, to the Cross Project Council for further dissemination.

## Record keeping

A record of all communications related to an incident report, escalation request, or appeal must be kept.

## Confidentiality

The identity of the harmed individual(s) and the and reporter(s) of an incident report must be kept confidential.

> The identity of the accused individual should be kept confidential. However, incidents requiring immediate action (e.g. to prevent further harm) and implementing the decision resulting from the incident management process might require sharing the identity of the accused individual beyond the people involved in the incident management process itself. Additionally, the obligation of confidentiality towards the accused individul ends if the accused individul chooses to disclose the information publicly. In all cases however, care should be taken to limit information sharing to what is strictly necessary to address the issue at hand and avoid making that sharing retaliatory.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The identity of the accused individual should be kept confidential. However, incidents requiring immediate action (e.g. to prevent further harm) and implementing the decision resulting from the incident management process might require sharing the identity of the accused individual beyond the people involved in the incident management process itself. Additionally, the obligation of confidentiality towards the accused individual ends if the accused individual chooses to disclose the information publicly. In all cases, however, care should be taken to limit information sharing to what is strictly necessary to address the issue at hand and avoid making that sharing retaliatory.
```

## Conflict of Interest

Any person involved with the management of an incident report must immediately notify the CoC Team in writing and recuse themselves from the process if they have been involved in the incident itself or have any other conflict of interest with any of the involved parties (e.g. same employer).

## Enforcement

### Incident management processes

> The Cross Project Council (CPC) defines, documents, and maintains all processes necessary for the management of incident reports and the enforcement of the code of code of conduct and of this policy through the [CoC Process for Incident Management](COC_PROCESS_FOR_INCIDENT_MANAGEMENT.md).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Cross Project Council (CPC) defines, documents, and maintains all processes necessary for the management of incident reports and the enforcement of the code of conduct and this policy through the [CoC Process for Incident Management](COC_PROCESS_FOR_INCIDENT_MANAGEMENT.md).
```

> The CPC works with the OpenJS Foundation staff to develop infrastructure and processes necessary to comply to the requirements of this policy, notably when it comes to record keeping, confidentiality, and transparency.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The CPC works with the OpenJS Foundation staff to develop the infrastructure and processes necessary to comply with the requirements of this policy, notably when it comes to record-keeping, confidentiality, and transparency.
```

### Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)

The Cross Project Council (CPC) delegates enforcement of the code of conduct to the Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team) through the [CoC Team Charter][].

The structure of the CoC Team and how its members are elected are described in the [CoC Team Charter][].

The current composition of the CoC Team is available in the [code of conduct][CoC] itself along with means to contact by email the whole CoC Team and each of its members individually.

The CoC Team is responsible for applying the [incident management processes][].

The CoC Team is empowered to involve external people to resolve an issue provided these commit to abide by the code of conduct, the [incident management processes][], and by this policy.

### Delegation to projects

Projects may opt-in to enforce the code of conduct themselves provided they meet the following requirements:

1. Commit to uphold the code of conduct.
2. Commit to uphold this policy.

> 3. Provide a general email address that incidents can be reported to and document it alongside the code of conduct.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3. Provide a general email address where incidents can be reported and document it alongside the code of conduct.
```

5. List the people responsible for managing incident reports alongside the code of conduct as outlined in the [Reporting incidents section](#reporting-incidents).
6. Publicly document their decision-making process for responding to incident reports.
7. Document the foundation's escalation and appeal process alongside the code of conduct.
8. Participate in good faith in the [escalation](#escalation) and [appeal](#appeals) processes.

## Moderation

Each project is free to implement moderation processes appropriate for the size and scope of the project provided these processes abide by the code of conduct and by this policy.

## Escalation

Reporters, harmed individuals, and accused individuals may [escalate](#escalation) an issue to the CoC Team at any point in the process in case of a conflict of interest, if the report is not being handled appropriately (for example, if there are unacceptable delays, a lack of communication, confidentiality isn't respected, etc.), or in case of an emergency.

The CoC Team is empowered to manage escalation requests of incident reports managed by projects that have opted-in to enforce the code of conduct themselves.

> If the CoC Team finds that the escalation request has merit, the CoC Team may decide to takeover the management of the incident report or refer the issue to the Cross Project Council which may request changes to the existing management process. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If the CoC Team finds that the escalation request has merit, the CoC Team may decide to take over the management of the incident report or refer the issue to the Cross Project Council which may request changes to the existing management process. 
```

Projects are expected to participate in good faith in the escalation process and to share all the information related to the incident report with the CoC Team. The CoC Team is expected to consider project and community needs during the escalation process and may involve the Cross Project Council if necessary and project leadership if appropriate.

## Appeals

> Harmed individuals and accused individuals have thirty (30) days to appeal to the CoC Team a decision made in response to an incident report. Decisions may only be appealled on the grounds that the documented process was not properly followed or that it did not meet the requirements of this policy. If the CoC Team finds that the appeal has merit, it may decide to override the decision that was previously made.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Harmed individuals and accused individuals have thirty (30) days after a response was provided to appeal to the CoC Team a decision made in response to an incident report. Decisions may only be appealed on the grounds that the documented process was not properly followed or that it did not meet the requirements of this policy. If the CoC Team finds that the appeal has merit, it may decide to override the decision that was previously made.
```

This document defines the OpenJS Foundation's code of conduct policy.

If you want to report an incident, go to [code-of-conduct.openjsf.org][CoC].

***

# Code of Conduct Policy

> The OpenJS Foundation (OpenJSF) delegates to the Cross Project Council (CPC), via its [charter][], the responsability of chosing, maintaining, and enforcing a Code of Conduct (CoC) for all of its projects, collab spaces, and for any related activities.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The OpenJS Foundation (OpenJSF) delegates to the Cross Project Council (CPC), via its [charter][], the responsibility of choosing, maintaining, and enforcing a Code of Conduct (CoC) for all of its projects, collab spaces, and for any related activities.
```

## Code of Conduct

The OpenJSF's code of conduct is located at [code-of-conduct.openjsf.org][CoC]. It is based on the [Contributor Covenant](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/).

A common code of conduct allows a common escalation and appeal process and allows better support of projects in their efforts to apply the code of conduct.

> All OpenJSF projects, collab spaces, and any activites related to the OpenJSF are operating under this code of conduct unless otherwise stated. (For example, events organized in partnership with other organizations might be operating under a different code of conduct.)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
All OpenJSF projects, collab spaces, and any activities related to the OpenJSF are operating under this code of conduct unless otherwise stated. (For example, events organized in partnership with other organizations might be operating under a different code of conduct.)
```

> Projects joining the foundation who already have a code of conduct will need to adopt the OpenJSF's CoC within three (3) months. Projects who don't already have a code of conduct operate under the OpenJSF's CoC as soon as they enter incubation.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Projects joining the foundation that already have a code of conduct will need to adopt the OpenJSF's CoC within three (3) months. Projects that don't already have a code of conduct operate under the OpenJSF's CoC as soon as they enter incubation.
```

## Reporting incidents

Reporting incidents should be as simple and flexible as possible.

All information necessary to report an incident must be publicly documented directly alongside the code of conduct itself. This information must contain at least the following:

1. A general email address at which incidents can be reported.
2. The name and email address of each recipient of the general email address.

> Reporters may chose to report an incident by using the general email address provided or by contacting any of its recipient individually, either by using their provided email, reaching out in person, or by any other reasonable mean.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Reporters may choose to report an incident by using the general email address provided or by contacting any of its recipients individually, either by using their provided email, reaching out in person, or by any other reasonable means.
```

> An acknowledgement of receipt should be promptly issued to incident reporters.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An acknowledgment of receipt should be promptly issued to incident reporters.
```
For consistency of using American English.

The name and contact details of the people responsible for managing the incident report should be provided to reporters as soon as possible (to uncover conflicts of interest upfront and allow for escalation).

## Commitment

The OpenJSF makes the following commitments to reporters and victims of CoC incidents:

> 1. All incident reports will be reviewed, investigated, and will result in a response that is deemed necessary and appropriate to the circumstances.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. All incident reports will be reviewed and investigated and will result in a response that is deemed necessary and appropriate to the circumstances.
```

> 1. All incident reports will be reviewed and investigated and will result in a response that is deemed necessary and appropriate to the circumstances.

Reviewer 6: This seems to imply that all reports _will_ result in a response. Is it possible for a report to result in _no_ response, or would e.g. replying to the reporter that no action will be taken also considered a "result"?

Author: Yeah. "We won't take action" is a response.

> 2. The identity of the victim(s) and reporter(s) of a code of conduct violation will be kept confidential.

Reviewer 6: Confidential from whom? Below it's mentioned that the CoC Team "is empowered to involve external people". Will the identities be kept confidential from them as well?

Author: I'm splitting those commitments up to make them more explicit. To answer your comment, however, external people are required to abide by the policy as stated, so that's covered.

Reviewer 6: Two separate thoughts here:
1. This means that someone reporting an incident cannot know ahead of time the set of people that their identity will be revealed to, on account of the CoC Team being empowered to bring in pretty much anyone. I guess that's ok?
2. There is no mention here of keeping the identity of someone accused of a violation confidential. Should that not be the case at least until the response has been determined?

Author: > This means that someone reporting an incident cannot know ahead of time the set of people that their identity will be revealed to, on account of the CoC Team being empowered to bring in pretty much anyone. I guess that's ok?

Yeah. Imagine there's an issue where the CoC Team needs to bring in a translator. There's no reasonable way to know their identity beforehand. It also doesn't matter. We're trying to avoid the case where someone reports a problem caused by someone and unknowingly report it to the very person that's causing the issue. And the current policy covers that imho.

> There is no mention here of keeping the identity of someone accused of a violation confidential. Should that not be the case at least until the response has been determined?

Yeah, that's a little more complicated. There are circumstances where that can't be the case (for example, if there's a risk of harm to additional people, legal considerations, etc.). Not sure how to properly manage this. Suggestions welcomed.

Author: I've added your second point as a task that needs to be resolved before merging this PR. Resolving this.

## Conflict of Interest

> Any person involved with the management of an incident report must immediatly notify the CoC Team in written and recuse themselves from the process if they have been involved in the incident itself or have any other conflict of interest with any of the involved parties (e.g. same employer).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Any person involved with the management of an incident report must immediately notify the CoC Team in writing and recuse themselves from the process if they have been involved in the incident itself or have any other conflict of interest with any of the involved parties (e.g. same employer).
```

## Enforcement

### Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team)

The Cross Project Council (CPC) delegates enforcement of the code of conduct to the Code of Conduct Team (CoC Team).

The structure of the CoC Team and the process by which its members are chosen are described in the [CoC Team processes][].

> The current composition of the CoC Team is available in the [code of conduct][CoC] itself along with means to contact by email the whole CoC Team and each of it members individually.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The current composition of the CoC Team is available in the [code of conduct][CoC] itself along with means to contact by email the whole CoC Team and each of its members individually.
```

The CoC Team is responsible for maintaining and applying the [incident management processes][].

The CoC Team is empowered to involve external people to resolve an issue provided these abide by the code of conduct and by this policy.

### Delegation to projects

> Projects may opt-in to enforce the code of conduct themselves provided they meet the following requirement:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Projects may opt-in to enforce the code of conduct themselves provided they meet the following requirements:
```

3. Define and publicly document a process by which the project selects people responsible for managing incident reports. For Impact and At Large projects, at least two people must be selected.
4. List the people responsible for managing incident reports alongside the code of conduct as outlined in the [Reporting incidents section](#reporting-incidents).
5. Publicly document their decision-making process for responding to incident reports.
6. Document the foundation's escalation and appeal process alongside the code of conduct.
7. Participate in good faith in the escalation and appeal processes.

Reporters, victims, and offenders may [escalate](#escalation) an issue to the CoC Team at any point in the process in case of a conflict of interest. They may [appeal](#appeals) the decision to the CoC Team up to thirty (30) days after a response was provided if they believe that the process was not followed properly.

## Moderation

Each project is free to implement moderation processes appropriate for the size and scope of the project provided these processes abide by the code of conduct and by this policy.

## Escalation

> The CoC Team is empowered to manage escalation requests of incident reports managed by projects which have opted-in to enforce the code of conduct themselves.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The CoC Team is empowered to manage escalation requests of incident reports managed by projects that have opted-in to enforce the code of conduct themselves.
```

Projects are expected to participate in good faith in the escalation process. 

## Appeals

Victim(s) and offender(s) of an incident have thirty (30) days to appeal to the CoC Team the decision made in response to an incident report if they believe the process was not properly followed.

> If the initial report was already managed by the CoC Team, a different set of CoC Team members should be chosen to manage the appeal process.

Reviewer 6: What is the minimum size for such a set? This seems to imply that the team needs to have at least twice that many members to be able to fulfill this step of the process.

Author: That's a process question around the makeup of the CoC Team that I'm purposely leaving out of the policy.

Author: The way I imagine this would be handled is by looping in more folks from the CPC and/or the Board in case there's a real issue.

Author: Also, I deliberately used _should_ here to account for situations where that would actually not be possible for lack of members.

Author: I've made this even more explicit now.

> If the appeal follows an incident report managed by a project, the project is expected to participate to the appel process in good faith. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If the appeal follows an incident report managed by a project, the project is expected to participate in the appeal process in good faith. 
```

The identity of the harmed individual(s) and the and reporter(s) of an incident report must be kept confidential.

> The identity of the accused individual should be kept confidential. However, incidents requiring immediate action (e.g. to prevent further harm) and implementing the decision resulting from the incident management process might require sharing the identity of the accused individual beyond the people involved in the incident management process itself. In such cases, care should be taken to not make that sharing retaliatory. The obligation of confidentiality towards the accused individul ends if the accused individul chooses to disclose the information publicly.

Reviewer 7: hmm, this feels a bit "react patents clause" punitive - it's more that, any confidential information publicly disclosed stops requiring confidentiality, but any non-disclosed information continues to require it.

Author: I think that the argument here is should there be partial or incorrect information made public that needs to be addressed or corrected. This might require providing more context.

Author: (I hear your point, though.)

Reviewer 7: The case where what’s made public is inaccurate/misleading is a tricky one, indeed, but in particular i think it’s important that the individual be able to reveal some parts of the confidential info while keeping other parts private.

Author: @ljharb fyi: I've reframed this a bit to try and better address your concern.

Reviewer 7: awesome, i think this is good enough to go forward :-) it'll likely need refining in the future but the intention seems captured to me.
